# 文档化部分

### 1. ⽂档化的好处 

1. 更好地交流设计决策
2. 帮助理解决策
3. 更新设计者的思维
4. 锻炼设计架构的能力
5. 支持地理分布的团队

### 2. 文档化的一些不足(挑战): 

1. 没有标准化
2.  对于大型系统⼗分耗时
3. 对视图的数量和本质没有达到共识 
4. 缺乏一整套标记语言和⼯具来全⾯描述架构所做的所有决定
5.  易受ddl的不良影响 

### 3. 文档内容: 

1. 组件接口和依赖
2. ⼦系统约束
3. 测试场景
4. 设计的系统和周围环境的关系

### 4. 架构文档需要遵守的7条规则:

1. 从读者⻆角度书写⽂文档 
2. 避免不必要的重复
3. 避免歧义 
4. 标准化组织 (Beyond) 
5. 记录架构决定背后的原因
6.  ⽂档尽可能保持较新的状态 
7. 审查文档是否与目的相符 

### 5. Views 

#### 1. style 连线题

这个老师在课堂上提问过，也在之前的考试中出现过，可以说是比较重要的。

1.  How it structed as a set of implementaion ————   Module  styles
2.  How it is structed as a set of elements taht have runtime behavior and interactions      C&C styles
3.  How it relates to non-software structures in its environment   ——— Allocation styles

#### 2. style 和 view 之间的关系

Style:    关注组件和组件之间的交互和职责限制。更关注架构方法，不包含具体的上下文和
问题。
Pattern:  体现软件系统基本的结构组织模式。关注上下⽂和问题，以及如何解决。
View:   是系统中特定类型的元素及其关系的表示。不同的视图⽀持不同的⽬标和⽤户，强调不同的系统元素和关系，同时在不同程度上表示不同的质量属性。



#### 3. View 本身和多样化的原因

A software architecture is a complex entity that can not be described in a simple one-dimensional fashion.  

**A view is a representation of a set of system elements and relations among them not all system elements, but those of a particular type.**

 For example, a layered view of a system would show elements of type “layer” that is, it would show the system’s decomposition into layers and the relations among those layers. A pure layered view would not, however, show the system’s services, or clients and servers, or data model, or any other type of element. 

Thus, views let us divide the multidimensional entity that is a software architecture into a number of (we hope) interesting and manageable representations of the system. The concept of *views* gives us our most fundamental principle of architecture documentation: 

**Documenting an architecture is a matter of documenting the relevant views and then adding documentation that applies to more than one view.** 

This maxim gives our approach to documentation its name: *Views and Beyond*. 

Different views also expose different quality attributes to different degrees. 

**Therefore, the quality attributes that are of most concern to you and the other stakeholders in the system’s development will affect the choice of what views to document.**  For instance, a  layered view will let you reason about your system’s portability, a deployment view will let you reason about your system’s performance and reliability, and so forth.



#### 4. Module View

A module is an implementation unit that provides a coherent set of responsibilities.



It is unlikely that the documentation of any software architecture can be complete without at least one module view.



##### Elements

Modules, which are implementation units of software that provide a coherent set of responsibilities.

##### Relations

* Is part of, which defines a part/whole relationship between the submodule—the part—and the aggregate module—the whole. 

* Depends on, which defines a dependency relationship be- tween two modules. Specific module views elaborate what dependency is meant. 

*  Is a, which defines a generalization/specialization relation- ship between a more specific module—the child—and a more general module—the parent. 

##### Constraints

Different module views may impose specific topological constraints, such as limitations on the visibility between modules.

##### Usage

* Blueprint for construction of the code 
*  Change-impact analysis
* Planning incremental development
* Requirements traceability analysis 
* Communicating the functionality of a system and the structure of its code base 
* Supporting the definition of work assignments, implementation schedules, and budget information 
* Showing the structure of information that the system needs to manage 



#### 5.  component-and-connector Views

Component-and-connector views show elements that have some runtime presence, such as processes, objects, clients, servers, and data stores. 

Components have interfaces called *ports*. A port defines a point of potential interaction of a component with its environment. A port usually has an explicit type, which defines the kind of behavior that can take place at that point of interaction. A component may have many ports of the same type, each forming a
different input or output channel at runtime. In this respect ports differ from interfaces of modules, whose interfaces are never replicated. You can annotate a port with a number or range of numbers to indicate replication; for example, “1..4” might mean that an interface could be replicated up to four times. A component’s ports should be explicitly documented, by showing them in the diagram and de-
fining them in the diagram’s supporting documentation.

The primary relation within a C&C view is *attachment*. *Attachments* indicate which connectors are attached to which components, thereby defining a system as a graph of components and connectors. Specifically, an attachment is denoted by associating (attaching) a component’s port to a connector’s role.



##### Elements

■  Components. Principal processing units and data stores. A compo-nent has a set of ports through which it interacts with other components (via connectors). 

■  Connectors. Pathways of interaction between components. Connec tors have a set of roles (interfaces) that indicate how components may use a connector in interactions. 

##### Relations

* Attachments. Component ports are associated with connector roles  to yield a graph of components and connectors*.* 

* Interface delegation. In some situations component ports are associated with one or more ports in an “internal” subarchitecture. The case is similar for the roles of a connector. 



##### Constraints

Components can only be attached to connectors, not directly to other components. 

- Connectors can only be attached to components, not directly to other 

  connectors. 

- Attachments can only be made between compatible ports and roles. 

- Interface delegation can only be defined between two compatible 

  ports (or two compatible roles). 

- Connectors cannot appear in isolation; a connector must be attached 

  to a component 

##### Usage

* Show how the system works. 

- Guide development by specifying structure and behavior of runtime 

  elements. 

- Help reason about runtime system quality attributes, such as perfor- mance and availability. 



#### 6.  Allocation  Views

**Allocation views describe the mapping of software units to elements of an environment in which the software is developed or in which it executes.** The environment might be the hardware, the operating environment in which the software is executed, the file systems supporting development or deployment, or the development organization(s).

Software elements and environmental elements have properties in allocation views.

 **The usual goal of an allocation view is to compare the properties required  by the software element with the properties *provided* by the environmental elements to determine whether the allocation will be successful or not.** 

For example,to ensure a component’s *required* response time, it has to execute on (be allocated
to) a processor that *provides* sufficiently fast processing power. For another example, a computing platform might not allow a task to use more than 10 kilobytes of virtual memory. An execution model of the software element in question can be used to determine the required virtual memory usage. Similarly, if you are
migrating a module from one team to another, you might want to ensure that the new team has the appropriate skills and background knowledge.



**Allocation views can depict static or dynamic views.** 

A static view depicts a fixed allocation of resources in an environment. A dynamic view depicts the conditions and the triggers for which allocation of resources changes according to loading. Some systems recruit and utilize new resources as their load increases. An example is a load-balancing system in which new processes or threads are created on another machine. In this view, the conditions under which the allocation changes, the allocation of runtime software, and the dynamic allocation mechanism need to be documented. (Recall from Chapter 1 that one of the allocation structures is the work assignment structure, which allocates modules to teams for development. That
relationship, too, can be allocated dynamically, depending on “load”—in this case, the load on development teams.)

##### Elements

■ Software element. A software element has properties that are required of the environment. 

■ Environmental element. An environmental element has properties that are provided to the software. 

##### Relations

Allocated to. A software element is mapped (allocated to) an environmental element. Properties are dependent on the particular view.

##### Constraints

 Varies by view

##### Usage

* For reasoning about performance, availability, security, and safety.
* For reasoning about distributed development and allocation of  work to teams.
*  For reasoning about concurrent access to software versions.
*  For reasoning about the form and mechanisms of system  installation. 



#### 7. Quality Views

**Module, C&C, and allocation views are all structural views: They primarily show the structures that the architect has engineered into the architecture to satisfy functional and quality attribute requirements.** 

These views are excellent for guiding and constraining downstream developers, whose primary job it is to implement those structures. However, in systems in which certain quality attributes (or, for that matter, some other kind of stakeholder concerns) are particularly important and pervasive, structural views may not be the best way to present the architectural solution to those needs. The reason is that the solution may be spread across multiple structures that are inconvenient to combine (for example, because the element types shown in each are different). 

Another kind of view, which we call a *quality view*, can be tailored for specific stakeholders or to address specific concerns. These quality views are formed by extracting the relevant pieces of structural views and packaging them together.
Here are five examples:

* A *security view* 
* A *communications view* 
* An *exception* or *error-handling view*  
* A *reliability* view 
* A *performance* view 



### 6. 对 view 进行文档化

重点在选择 view 和 对 view 进行合并

At a minimum, expect to have at least one module view, at least one C&C view, and for larger systems, at least one allocation view in your architecture doc- ument. Beyond that basic rule of thumb, however, there is a three-step method for choosing the views: 

#### Step 1: Build a stakeholder/view table.

 **Enumerate the stakeholders for your project’s software architecture documentation down the rows.** Be as comprehensive as you can. For the columns, enumerate the views that apply to your system. (Use the structures discussed in Chapter 1, the views discussed in this chapter, and the views that your design work in ADD has suggested as a starting list of candidates.) Some views (such as decom- position, uses, and work assignment) apply to every system, while others (various C&C views, the layered view) only apply to some systems. **For the columns, make sure to include the views or view sketches you already have as a result of your design work so far.** 

Once you have the rows and columns defined, fill in each cell to describe how much information the stakeholder requires from the view: none, overview only, moderate detail, or high detail. The candidate view list going into step 2 now consists of those views for which some stakeholder has a vested interest.

####Step 2: Combine views.

 The candidate view list from step 1 is likely to yield an impractically large number of views. This step will winnow the list to manageable size. Look for marginal views in the table: those that require only an overview, or that serve very few stakeholders. **Combine each marginal view with another view that has a stronger constituency.** 

#### Step 3: Prioritize and stage. 

After step 2 you should have the minimum set of views needed to serve your stakeholder community. At this point you need to decide what to do first. What you do first depends on your project, but here are some things to consider: 

- The decomposition view (one of the module views) is a particularly helpful view to release early. High-level (that is, broad and shallow) decompositions are often easy to design, and with this information the project manager can start to staff development teams, put training in place, determine which parts to outsource, and start producing budgets and schedules. 
- Be aware that you don’t have to satisfy all the information needs of all the stakeholders to the fullest extent. Providing 80 percent of the information goes a long way, and this might be good enough so that the stakeholders can do their job. Check with the stakeholder to see if a subset of informa- tion would be sufficient. They typically prefer a product that is delivered on time and within budget over getting the perfect documentation. 
- You don’t have to complete one view before starting another. People can make progress with overview-level information, so a breadth-first ap- proach is often the best. 



###  7. Beyond

As shown in Figure 18.4, documentation beyond views can be divided into two parts: 

1. 1. *Overview of the architecture documentation.* This tells how the documen- tation is laid out and organized so that a stakeholder of the architecture can find the information he or she needs efficiently and reliably. 
   2. *Information about the architecture.* Here, the information that remains to be captured beyond the views themselves is a short system overview to ground any reader as to the purpose of the system and the way the views are related to one another, an overview of and rationale behind systemwide design approaches, a list of elements and where they appear, and a glossary and an acronym list for the entire architecture. 