# 软件产品线（课本描述）

A software architecture represents a significant investment of time and effort,usually by senior talent. So it is natural to want to maximize the return on this investment by reusing an architecture across multiple systems.

There are many ways this happens in practice. The patterns we discussed in Chapter 13 are a big step in this direction; using a pattern is reusing a package of architectural decisions (albeit not a complete architecture). And strictly speaking, every time you make a change to a system, you are reusing its architecture (or  whatever portion of its architecture you don’t have to change).

This chapter shows yet another way to reuse a software architecture (and many other assets as well) across a family of related systems, and the benefits that doing so can bring. Many software-producing organizations tend to produce systems or products that resemble each other more than they differ. This is an opportunity for reusing the architecture across these similar products. These software product lines simplify the creation of new members of a family of similar systems.

This kind of reuse has been shown to bring substantial benefits that include reduced cost of construction, higher quality, and greatly reduced time to market.  

The Software Engineering Institute defines a software product line as “a set  of software-intensive systems sharing a common, managed set of features that satisfy the specific needs of a particular market segment or mission and that are  developed from a common set of core assets in a prescribed way.” 

The vision is of a set of reusable assets (called core assets) based on a common architecture and the software elements that populate that architecture. The core assets also include designs and their documentation, user manuals, project management artifacts such as budgets and schedules, software test plans and test cases, and more. 

The product line approach works because the core assets were built specifi- cally to support multiple members of the same family of products. Hence, reusing them is faster and less expensive than reinventing those software assets for each new product or system in the organization’s portfolio. Core assets, including the architecture, are usually designed with built-in variation points—places where they can be quickly tailored in preplanned ways. 

Once the core assets are in place, system building becomes a matter of 

- Accessing the appropriate assets in the core asset base 

- Exercising the variation points to configure them as required for the system 

  being built 

- Assembling that system 

  In the ideal case, this can be done automatically. Additional software developed for an individual product, if needed at all, tends to account for a small fraction of the total software. Integration and testing replace design and coding as the pre- dominant activities. 

  Product lines are nothing new in manufacturing. Many historians trace the con- cept to Eli Whitney’s use of interchangeable parts to build rifles in the early 1800s, but earlier examples also exist. Today, there are hundreds of examples in manufacturing: think of the products of companies like General Motors, Toy- ota, Boeing, Airbus, Dell, even McDonald’s, and the portfolio of similar products that each one produces. Each company exploits commonality in different ways. Boeing, for example, developed the 757 and 767 in tandem, and the parts lists of these two very different aircraft overlap by about 60 percent. 

  The improvements in cost, time to market, and productivity that come with a suc- cessful software product line can be breathtaking. Consider: 

- Nokia credits the software product line approach with giving it flexibility to bring over a dozen phones to market each year, as opposed to the three or so it could manage before, all with an unprecedented variety of features. 
- Cummins, Inc., was able to reduce the time it takes to produce the software for a diesel engine from about a year to about a week. 
- Hewlett-Packard builds products using one-quarter of the staff, in one-third of the time, and with one twenty-fifth the number of defects, compared with software built before the advent of software product line engineering. 
- Deutsche Bank estimates $4 million in savings per year realized from building its global transaction and settlement software as a product line. 
- Philips reports reduced faults during integration in its high-end television portfolio by adopting the product line approach. Product diversity used to be one of the top three concerns of their architects. Now it doesn’t even make the list of concerns at all; the product line approach has taken software development off the critical path—the software no longer determines the delivery date of the product. 

- With a product line of satellite ground control systems it commissioned, the 

  U.S. National Reconnaissance Office reported the first product requiring 10 percent the expected number of developers and having one-tenth the ex- pected number of defects. 

- In Philips’s medical systems product line, the software product line ap- proach has cut both software defects and time to market by more than half. 

  Creating a successful product line depends on a coordinated strategy involving software engineering, technical management, and organization management. Be- cause this is a book on software architecture, we focus on the architectural as- pects of software product lines, but all aspects must work together in order for an organization to successfully create a product line. 



**25.1 an Example of Product line Variability** 

The following example will help us illustrate the concept of product line vari- ability. In a product line of software to support U.S. bank loan offices, suppose we have a software module that calculates what a customer owes in the current month. For 18 of the 21 products in our product line, this module is completely adequate. However, our company is about to enter the market in the state of Del- aware, which has certain laws that affect what a customer can owe. For the three products we plan to sell in Delaware, we need a module that differs from the “standard” module. Analysis shows that the difference will affect about 250 lines of source code in our 8,000-line module. 

To build one of the Delaware products, what do we do? An obvious op- tion is to copy the module, change the 250 or so lines, and use the new version in the three products. This practice is called “clone-and-own”—the new projects “clone” the module, change it, and then “own” the new version. Most companies, when faced with this situation, resort to clone-and-own. It’s expedient in that it provides a quick start to a new product, but it comes with a substantial cost down the road. 

The problem with clone-and-own is that it doesn’t scale. Suppose each of our 21 products comprises roughly 100 modules. If each module is allowed to diverge for each product, that’s potentially 2,100 modules that the maintenance staff has to deal with, each one spiraling off on its own separate maintenance trajectory based on the needs of the lone project each version is used in. Many companies’ growth in a market is limited—brought to a halt, in fact—by their in- ability to staff the maintenance of so many separate versions of so many different assets composing the products in their portfolio. An organization fielding several versions of several products finds itself dealing with a staggeringly complex code base. The strain begins to show when a systematic change needs to be made to all of the products—for example, to add a new feature, or migrate to a new platform, or make the user interface work in a different language. Because each version of each component used in each product has been allowed to evolve separately, now suddenly making a systematic change becomes prohibitively expensive (and only gets worse each time a new product is added—the labor involved grows as the *square* of the number of products). It only takes a few such portfolio-wide changes before organizations feel that they’ve hit a wall of complexity and expense. 

So much for clone-and-own. What else can we do? Instead of allowing up to 21 versions of each module, we would much rather find a way to take advantage of the fact that these nearly identical modules vary only in small, well-defined ways. To take advantage of their similarities, we introduce a *variation mechanism* into the module. (Variation mechanisms are often realized as tactics, such as the “defer binding” set of tactics described in Chapter 7.) This variation mechanism will let us maintain a single module that can adapt to the range of variations in the applications (in our example, the 21 banking products) that it has to support. If we plan to market our products in states that, like Delaware, have their own laws affecting what a customer owes, we may need to support additional varia- tions of the module. So our variation mechanism should be able to accommodate those possibilities as well. 

The payoff for this up-front planning is that an asset used in any of the prod- ucts exists as a *single* version that (through the exercising of built-in variation mechanisms) works for all of the products in the product line. And now, mak- ing a portfolio-wide change merely consists of changing the core assets that are affected. Because all future versions of all products use the same core assets, changing the core asset base has the effect of changing all of the products in the organization’s portfolio. 



**25.2 What Makes a Software Product line Work?** 

What makes product lines succeed is that the commonalities shared by the prod- ucts can be exploited through reuse to achieve production economies. The poten- tial for reuse is broad and far-ranging, including the following: 

- *Requirements*. Most of the requirements are common with those of earlier systems and so can be reused. In fact, many organizations simply maintain a single set of requirements that apply across the entire family as a core asset; the requirements for a particular system are then written as “delta” documents off the full set. In any case, most of the effort consumed by re- quirements analysis is saved from system to system. 

- *Architectural design*. An architecture for a software system represents a large investment of time from the organization’s most talented engineers. As we have seen, the quality goals for a system—performance, reliability, modifiability, and so forth—are largely promoted or inhibited once the architecture is in place. If the architecture is wrong, the system cannot be saved. For a new product, however, this most important design step is al- 

  ready done and need not be repeated. 

  - *Software elements*. Software elements are applicable across individual 

    products. Element reuse includes the (often difficult) initial design work. Design successes are captured and reused; design dead ends are avoided, not repeated. This includes design of each element’s interface, its docu- mentation, its test plans and procedures, and any models (such as perfor- mance models) used to predict or measure its behavior. One reusable set of elements is the system’s user interface, which represents an enormous and vital set of design decisions. And as a result of this interface reuse, products in a product line usually enjoy the same look and feel as each other, an ad- vantage in the marketplace. 

  - *Modeling and analysis*. Performance models, schedulability analysis, dis- tributed system issues (such as proving the absence of deadlock), allocation of processes to processors, fault tolerance schemes, and network load poli- cies all carry over from product to product. Companies that build real-time distributed systems report that one of the major headaches associated with production has all but vanished. When they field a new product in their product line, they have high confidence that the timing problems have been worked out and that the bugs associated with distributed computing— synchronization, network loading, and absence of deadlock—have been eliminated. 

  - *Testing*. Test plans, test processes, test cases, test data, test harnesses, and the communication paths required to report and fix problems are already in place. 

  - *Project planning artifacts*. Budgeting and scheduling are more predictable because experience is a high-fidelity indicator of future performance. Work breakdown structures need not be invented each time. Teams, team size, and team composition are all easily determined. 

    All of these represent valuable core assets, each of which can be imbued with its own variation points that can be exercised to build a product. We’ll look at architectural variation points later in this chapter, but for now imagine that any artifact represented by text can consist of text blocks that are exposed or hidden for a particular product. Thus, the artifact that is maintained in the core asset base represents a superset of any version that will be produced for a product. 

    Artifact reuse in turn enables reuse of knowledge: 

  ■ *Processes, methods, and tools*. Configuration control procedures and fa- cilities, documentation plans and approval processes, tool environments, system generation and distribution procedures, coding standards, and many other day-to-day engineering support activities can all be carried over from product to product. The software development process is in place and has been used before. 